README.md, before:

[![PyPI version](https://img.shields.io/pypi/v/blackbricks.svg?logo=pypi&logoColor=FFE873)](https://pypi.org/project/blackbricks/)
[![Downloads](https://pepy.tech/badge/blackbricks)](https://pepy.tech/project/blackbricks)
[![Downloads per month](https://pepy.tech/badge/blackbricks/month)](https://pepy.tech/project/blackbricks/month)
[![License](https://img.shields.io/pypi/l/blackbricks)](LICENSE)
[![Code style: Black](https://img.shields.io/badge/code%20style-black-000000.svg)](https://github.com/psf/black)

# Blackbricks

A formatting tool for your Databricks notebooks.

- Python cells are formatted with [black](https://github.com/psf/black)
- SQL cells are formatted with [sqlparse](https://github.com/andialbrecht/sqlparse)

## Breaking changes with version 1.0

Earlier versions of blackbricks applied a patched version of black in order to allow two-space indentation. This was
done because Databricks used two-space indentation, and did not allow you to change that. 

Since then, Databricks has added the option to choose. Because you can now choose, blackbricks re-joins black in being
uncompromising, and since version 1.0 you can no longer choose anything but 4 space indentation.

If you _must_ keep using two-space indentation, then stick to versions `<1.0`.

## Table of Contents

* [Installation](#installation)
* [Usage](#usage)
* [Version control integration](#version-control-integration)
* [Contributing](#contributing)
* [FAQ](#faq)

## Installation

While you can use `pip` directly, you should prefer using [pipx](https://pypa.github.io/pipx/).

```bash
$ pipx install blackbricks
```

You probably also want to have installed the `databricks-cli`, in order to use `blackbricks` directly on your notebooks.

``` bash
$ pipx install databricks-cli
$ databricks configure  # Required in order to use `blackbricks` on remote notebooks.
```

## Usage
You can use `blackbricks` on Python notebook files stored locally, or directly on the notebooks stored in Databricks. 

For the most part, `blackbricks` operates very similarly to `black`.

``` bash
$ blackbricks notebook1.py notebook2.py  # Formats both notebooks.
$ blackbricks notebook_directory/  # Formats every notebook under the directory (recursively).
```
An important difference is that `blackbricks` will ignore any file that does not contain the `# Databricks notebook
source` header on the first line. Databricks adds this line to all Python notebooks. This means you can happily run
`blackbricks` on a directory with both notebooks and regular Python files, and `blackbricks` won't touch the latter.

If you specify the `-r` or `--remote` flag, `blackbricks` will work directly on your notebooks stored in Databricks.

``` bash
$ blackbricks --remote /Users/username/notebook.py
$ blackbricks --remote /Repos/username/repo-name/notebook.py
```

### Full usage

```text
$ poetry run blackbricks --help

 Usage: blackbricks [OPTIONS] [FILENAMES]...

 Formatting tool for Databricks python notebooks.
 Python cells are formatted using `black`, and SQL cells are formatted by `sqlparse`.
 Local files (without the `--remote` option):
 - Only files that look like Databricks (Python) notebooks will be processed. That is,
 they must start with the header `# Databricks notebook source`
 - If you specify a directory as one of the file names, all files in that directory will
 be added, including any subdirectory.
 Remote files (with the `--remote` option):
 - Make sure you have installed the Databricks CLI (``pip install databricks_cli``)
 - Make sure you have configured at least one profile (`databricks configure`). Check the
 file `~/.databrickscfg` if you are not sure.
 - File paths should start with `/`. Otherwise they are interpreted as relative to
 `/Users/username`, where `username` is the username specified in the Databricks profile
 used.

╭─ Arguments ────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────╮
│   filenames      [FILENAMES]...  Path to the notebook(s) to format. [default: None]    │
╰────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────╯
╭─ Options ──────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────╮
│ --remote                     -r                             If this option is used,    │
│                                                             all filenames are treated  │
│                                                             as paths to notebooks on   │
│                                                             your Databricks host (i.e. │
│                                                             not local files).          │
│ --profile                    -p                    NAME     If using --remote, which   │
│                                                             Databricks profile to use. │
│                                                             [default: DEFAULT]         │
│ --line-length                                      INTEGER  How many characters per    │
│                                                             line to allow.             │
│                                                             [default: 88]              │
│ --sql-upper                      --no-sql-upper             SQL keywords should be     │
│                                                             UPPERCASE or lowercase.    │
│                                                             [default: sql-upper]       │
│ --check                                                     Don't write the files      │
│                                                             back, just return the      │
│                                                             status. Return code 0      │
│                                                             means nothing would        │
│                                                             change.                    │
│ --diff                                                      Don't write the files      │
│                                                             back, just output a diff   │
│                                                             for each file on stdout.   │
│ --version                                                   Display version            │
│                                                             information and exit.      │
│ --help                                                      Show this message and      │
│                                                             exit.                      │
╰────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────╯
```



## Version control integration

Use [pre-commit](https://pre-commit.com). Add a `.pre-commit-config.yaml` file
to your repo with the following content (changing/removing the `args` as you
wish): 

```yaml
repos:
-   repo: https://github.com/inspera/blackbricks
    rev: 1.0.0
    hooks:
    - id: blackbricks
      args: [--line-length=120]
```

Set the `rev` attribute to the most recent version of `blackbricks`.
The `args` are optional and can be used to set any of `blackbricks` options.

## Contributing

If you find blackbricks useful, feel free to say so with a star. If you think it is utterly broken, you are more than
welcome to contribute improvements. Please open an issue first to discuss what you want added/fixed. Unless you are just
adding tests. In that case your pull request is extremely likely to be merged right away.

## FAQ

### Can I disable SQL formatting?

Sure! Certain SQL statements might not be parsed and indented properly by `sqlparse`, and the result can be jumbled
formatting. You can disable SQL formatting for a cell by adding `-- nofmt` to the very first line of a cell:

```sql
%sql  -- nofmt
select this,
             sql_will,   -- be kept just
         like_this
  from if_that_is.what_you_need
```

### How do I use `blackbricks` on my Databricks notebooks?

First, make sure you have set up `databricks-cli` on your system (see [installation](#installation)), and that you have
at least one profile setup in `~/.databrickscfg`. As an example:

```cfg
# File: ~/.databrickscfg

[DEFAULT]
host = https://dbc-b23456-a1243.cloud.databricks.com/
username = username@example.com
password = dapi12345678901234567890

[OTHERPROFILE]
host = https://dbc-c54321-d234.cloud.databricks.com
username = name.user@example.com
password = dapi09876543211234567890
```

You should use [access tokens](https://docs.databricks.com/dev-tools/api/latest/authentication.html) instead of your actual password.

You can then do:

``` bash
$ blackbricks --remote /Users/username@example.com/notebook.py  # Uses DEFAULT profile.
$ blackbricks --remote notebook.py  # Equivalent to the above.
$ blackbricks --remote --profile OTHERPROFILE /Users/name.user@example.com/notebook.py
$ blackbricks --remote --profile OTHERPROFILE notebook.py  # Equivalent to the above.
$ blackbricks --remote /Repos/username@example.com/repo-name/notebook.py  # Targeting notebook in a Repo
```

### Can you run blackbricks while using databricks in the browser?

See https://github.com/inspera/blackbricks/issues/27.

### I get an error: `TypeError: init() got an unexpected keyword argument 'no_args_is_help'`

This means you had an old version of `click` installed from before, and your installation didn't upgrade it
automatically. Updating your installation should do the trick, e.g. `pip install -U blackbricks` or similar depending on
your installation method of choice.


### Shell commands like `!ls` throws an error

See #21.

Commit message:

docs: update README FAQ
- Fix link rendering
- Provide link to new Databricks feature for using black directly in a notebook

README.md, after:

[![PyPI version](https://img.shields.io/pypi/v/blackbricks.svg?logo=pypi&logoColor=FFE873)](https://pypi.org/project/blackbricks/)
[![Downloads](https://pepy.tech/badge/blackbricks)](https://pepy.tech/project/blackbricks)
[![Downloads per month](https://pepy.tech/badge/blackbricks/month)](https://pepy.tech/project/blackbricks/month)
[![License](https://img.shields.io/pypi/l/blackbricks)](LICENSE)
[![Code style: Black](https://img.shields.io/badge/code%20style-black-000000.svg)](https://github.com/psf/black)

# Blackbricks

A formatting tool for your Databricks notebooks.

- Python cells are formatted with [black](https://github.com/psf/black)
- SQL cells are formatted with [sqlparse](https://github.com/andialbrecht/sqlparse)

## Breaking changes with version 1.0

Earlier versions of blackbricks applied a patched version of black in order to allow two-space indentation. This was
done because Databricks used two-space indentation, and did not allow you to change that. 

Since then, Databricks has added the option to choose. Because you can now choose, blackbricks re-joins black in being
uncompromising, and since version 1.0 you can no longer choose anything but 4 space indentation.

If you _must_ keep using two-space indentation, then stick to versions `<1.0`.

## Table of Contents

* [Installation](#installation)
* [Usage](#usage)
* [Version control integration](#version-control-integration)
* [Contributing](#contributing)
* [FAQ](#faq)

## Installation

While you can use `pip` directly, you should prefer using [pipx](https://pypa.github.io/pipx/).

```bash
$ pipx install blackbricks
```

You probably also want to have installed the `databricks-cli`, in order to use `blackbricks` directly on your notebooks.

``` bash
$ pipx install databricks-cli
$ databricks configure  # Required in order to use `blackbricks` on remote notebooks.
```

## Usage
You can use `blackbricks` on Python notebook files stored locally, or directly on the notebooks stored in Databricks. 

For the most part, `blackbricks` operates very similarly to `black`.

``` bash
$ blackbricks notebook1.py notebook2.py  # Formats both notebooks.
$ blackbricks notebook_directory/  # Formats every notebook under the directory (recursively).
```
An important difference is that `blackbricks` will ignore any file that does not contain the `# Databricks notebook
source` header on the first line. Databricks adds this line to all Python notebooks. This means you can happily run
`blackbricks` on a directory with both notebooks and regular Python files, and `blackbricks` won't touch the latter.

If you specify the `-r` or `--remote` flag, `blackbricks` will work directly on your notebooks stored in Databricks.

``` bash
$ blackbricks --remote /Users/username/notebook.py
$ blackbricks --remote /Repos/username/repo-name/notebook.py
```

### Full usage

```text
$ poetry run blackbricks --help

 Usage: blackbricks [OPTIONS] [FILENAMES]...

 Formatting tool for Databricks python notebooks.
 Python cells are formatted using `black`, and SQL cells are formatted by `sqlparse`.
 Local files (without the `--remote` option):
 - Only files that look like Databricks (Python) notebooks will be processed. That is,
 they must start with the header `# Databricks notebook source`
 - If you specify a directory as one of the file names, all files in that directory will
 be added, including any subdirectory.
 Remote files (with the `--remote` option):
 - Make sure you have installed the Databricks CLI (``pip install databricks_cli``)
 - Make sure you have configured at least one profile (`databricks configure`). Check the
 file `~/.databrickscfg` if you are not sure.
 - File paths should start with `/`. Otherwise they are interpreted as relative to
 `/Users/username`, where `username` is the username specified in the Databricks profile
 used.

╭─ Arguments ────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────╮
│   filenames      [FILENAMES]...  Path to the notebook(s) to format. [default: None]    │
╰────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────╯
╭─ Options ──────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────╮
│ --remote                     -r                             If this option is used,    │
│                                                             all filenames are treated  │
│                                                             as paths to notebooks on   │
│                                                             your Databricks host (i.e. │
│                                                             not local files).          │
│ --profile                    -p                    NAME     If using --remote, which   │
│                                                             Databricks profile to use. │
│                                                             [default: DEFAULT]         │
│ --line-length                                      INTEGER  How many characters per    │
│                                                             line to allow.             │
│                                                             [default: 88]              │
│ --sql-upper                      --no-sql-upper             SQL keywords should be     │
│                                                             UPPERCASE or lowercase.    │
│                                                             [default: sql-upper]       │
│ --check                                                     Don't write the files      │
│                                                             back, just return the      │
│                                                             status. Return code 0      │
│                                                             means nothing would        │
│                                                             change.                    │
│ --diff                                                      Don't write the files      │
│                                                             back, just output a diff   │
│                                                             for each file on stdout.   │
│ --version                                                   Display version            │
│                                                             information and exit.      │
│ --help                                                      Show this message and      │
│                                                             exit.                      │
╰────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────╯
```



## Version control integration

Use [pre-commit](https://pre-commit.com). Add a `.pre-commit-config.yaml` file
to your repo with the following content (changing/removing the `args` as you
wish): 

```yaml
repos:
-   repo: https://github.com/inspera/blackbricks
    rev: 1.0.0
    hooks:
    - id: blackbricks
      args: [--line-length=120]
```

Set the `rev` attribute to the most recent version of `blackbricks`.
The `args` are optional and can be used to set any of `blackbricks` options.

## Contributing

If you find blackbricks useful, feel free to say so with a star. If you think it is utterly broken, you are more than
welcome to contribute improvements. Please open an issue first to discuss what you want added/fixed. Unless you are just
adding tests. In that case your pull request is extremely likely to be merged right away.

## FAQ

### Can I disable SQL formatting?

Sure! Certain SQL statements might not be parsed and indented properly by `sqlparse`, and the result can be jumbled
formatting. You can disable SQL formatting for a cell by adding `-- nofmt` to the very first line of a cell:

```sql
%sql  -- nofmt
select this,
             sql_will,   -- be kept just
         like_this
  from if_that_is.what_you_need
```

### How do I use `blackbricks` on my Databricks notebooks?

First, make sure you have set up `databricks-cli` on your system (see [installation](#installation)), and that you have
at least one profile setup in `~/.databrickscfg`. As an example:

```cfg
# File: ~/.databrickscfg

[DEFAULT]
host = https://dbc-b23456-a1243.cloud.databricks.com/
username = username@example.com
password = dapi12345678901234567890

[OTHERPROFILE]
host = https://dbc-c54321-d234.cloud.databricks.com
username = name.user@example.com
password = dapi09876543211234567890
```

You should use [access tokens](https://docs.databricks.com/dev-tools/api/latest/authentication.html) instead of your actual password.

You can then do:

``` bash
$ blackbricks --remote /Users/username@example.com/notebook.py  # Uses DEFAULT profile.
$ blackbricks --remote notebook.py  # Equivalent to the above.
$ blackbricks --remote --profile OTHERPROFILE /Users/name.user@example.com/notebook.py
$ blackbricks --remote --profile OTHERPROFILE notebook.py  # Equivalent to the above.
$ blackbricks --remote /Repos/username@example.com/repo-name/notebook.py  # Targeting notebook in a Repo
```

### Can you run blackbricks while using Databricks in the browser?

No. See https://github.com/inspera/blackbricks/issues/27 for why.

However, Databricks now allows you to [format your notebooks with black directly](https://docs.databricks.com/notebooks/notebooks-use.html#format-code-cells).

### I get an error: `TypeError: init() got an unexpected keyword argument 'no_args_is_help'`

This means you had an old version of `click` installed from before, and your installation didn't upgrade it
automatically. Updating your installation should do the trick, e.g. `pip install -U blackbricks` or similar depending on
your installation method of choice.


### Shell commands like `!ls` throws an error

See https://github.com/inspera/blackbricks/issues/21.
